Define an anti-forgery limit (#3620)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-tls.md

exceeded. For the cipher suites mentioned in this document, the limits in
Section 5.5 of {{!TLS13}} apply. {{!TLS13}} does not specify a limit for
AEAD_AES_128_CCM, but the analysis in {{ccm-bounds}} shows that a limit of 2^24
packets can be used to obtain the same confidentiality protection as the limits
specified in TLS.

The usage limits defined in TLS 1.3 exist to provide protection against attacks
on confidentiality and apply to successful applications of AEAD protection. The
integrity protections in authenticated encryption also depend on limiting the
number of attempts to forge packets. TLS achieves this by closing connections
after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple attempts at defeating
integrity protection.

Endpoints MUST count the number of packets that are received but cannot be
authenticated. Packet protection keys MUST NOT be used for removing packet
protection after authentication fails on more than a per-AEAD limit. Endpoints
MUST initiate a key update before reaching this limit. Applying a limit reduces

> the probability than attacker is able to successfully forge a packet; see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the probability that an attacker is able to successfully forge a packet; see
```

{{AEBounds}} and {{ROBUST}}.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, AEAD_AES_256_GCM, and AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305 the

> number of packets that fail authentication MUST NOT exceed 2^36. Note that the

Reviewer 2: This MUST NOT is a bit of a circuitous requirement. Perhaps "if the number of packets that fail authentication exceeds 2^36, the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection"

analysis in {{AEBounds}} supports a higher limit for the AEAD_AES_128_GCM and
AEAD_AES_256_GCM, but this specification recommends a lower limit. For
AEAD_AES_128_CCM the number of packets that fail authentication MUST NOT exceed

> 2^24.5; see {{ccm-bounds}}.

Reviewer 2: similar to above

Any TLS cipher suite that is specified for use with QUIC MUST define limits on
the use of the associated AEAD function that preserves margins for
confidentiality and integrity. That is, limits MUST be specified for the number
of packets that can be authenticated and for the number packets that can fail

> authentication.  Any limits SHOULD reference any analysis upon which values are

Reviewer 2: This is a strange SHOULD. It's a recommendation about how the spec is to be written in the future. I would remove the normative here.

based and describe any assumptions used in that analysis.

Note:

> : These limits were originally calculated based using assumptions about the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: These limits were originally calculated using assumptions about the
```

discarded.

## Minimum Key Update Frequency

Key updates MUST be initiated before usage limits on packet protection keys are
exceeded. For the cipher suites mentioned in this document, the limits in
Section 5.5 of {{!TLS13}} apply. {{!TLS13}} does not specify a limit for
AEAD_AES_128_CCM, but the analysis in {{ccm-bounds}} shows that a limit of 2^23
packets can be used to obtain the same confidentiality protection as the limits
specified in TLS.

> The usage limits defined in TLS 1.3 exist to provide protection against attacks

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The usage limits defined in TLS 1.3 exist for protection against attacks
```

on confidentiality and apply to successful applications of AEAD protection. The
integrity protections in authenticated encryption also depend on limiting the
number of attempts to forge packets. TLS achieves this by closing connections
after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any

> packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple attempts at defeating
> integrity protection.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple attempts forgery attempts.
```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple forgery attempts.
```

Duplicate.

Reviewer 4: :-)

> Endpoints MUST count the number of packets that are received but cannot be
> authenticated.  If the number of packets that fail authentication exceeds a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Endpoints MUST count the number of received packets that fail authentication.
If the number of packets that fail authentication exceeds a
```

limit that is specific to the AEAD in use, the endpoint MUST immediately close

> the connection.  Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before reaching this

Reviewer 6: This text feels unclear to me. It could be interpreted as "you MUST close the connection and initiate key rotation" which is silly. I think what's missing is the fact that the counter of invalid packets received is rest on key rotation. But if we have a "MUST initiate rotation", what's the point of the "MUST close the connection"?

limit.  Applying a limit reduces the probability that an attacker is able to
successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}} and {{ROBUST}}.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, AEAD_AES_256_GCM, and AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the limit on
the number of packets that fail authentication is 2^36.  Note that the analysis
in {{AEBounds}} supports a higher limit for the AEAD_AES_128_GCM and
AEAD_AES_256_GCM, but this specification recommends a lower limit.  For
AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the limit on the number of packets that fail authentication
is 2^23.5; see {{ccm-bounds}}.

Note:

: These limits were originally calculated using assumptions about the
  limits on TLS record size. The maximum size of a TLS record is 2^14 bytes.
  In comparison, QUIC packets can be up to 2^16 bytes.  However, it is
  expected that QUIC packets will generally be smaller than TLS records.

>   Where packets might be larger than 2^14 bytes in length, smaller limits might

Reviewer 6: This sounds scary to me. It feels like the spec is saying `Computing the limits for larger packet sizes is left as an exercise to the reader.` As a reader of this specification, I personally do not feel competent to get that right.

Author: Yes, that is what it says.  And it should be scary.  That is, if you want 64k packets, be prepared to read the papers.  (However, if someone ignores this, the damage isn't that bad, as the worst effect from this set of AEADs is in reducing the margin by a factor of 16 to 2^-56/2^-53, which is still small.)

It also says that the margins are usually better in practice than the analysis permits.

Reviewer 6: It would be really nice to do the math for 2^16 byte packets in this document, but I'm not volunteering so I guess I can live with this as is

packets can be used to obtain the same confidentiality protection as the limits
specified in TLS.

The usage limits defined in TLS 1.3 exist to provide protection against attacks
on confidentiality and apply to successful applications of AEAD protection. The
integrity protections in authenticated encryption also depend on limiting the
number of attempts to forge packets. TLS achieves this by closing connections
after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple attempts at defeating
integrity protection.

Endpoints MUST count the number of packets that are received but cannot be
authenticated. Packet protection keys MUST NOT be used for removing packet
protection after authentication fails on more than a limit that is specific to
the AEAD in use. Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before reaching this
limit. Applying a limit reduces the probability that an attacker is able to
successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}} and {{ROBUST}}.

For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, AEAD_AES_256_GCM, and AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, if the
number of packets that fail authentication exceeds 2^36, the endpoint MUST

> immediately close the connection.  Note that the analysis in {{AEBounds}}

Reviewer 7: I wonder if "MUST immediately close the connection" is correct. Our recommendation, stated above, is to do a key update.

I think it would be fine to simply say "MUST NOT exceed X."

Author: My thinking was that this is the necessary reaction if the key update was not successful before this limit was reached.  That we require a key update to be initiated before this is reached isn't any guarantee that the key update will succeed.

Reviewer 7: I see. Thank you for the clarification.

Then, I think that the text could become less confusing if we move "MUST close the connection" to the paragraph above, and change this paragraph to just listing the numbers.

For example, the paragraph above can be changed to something like:
_Endpoints MUST count the number of packets that are received but cannot be authenticated. If the number of packets that fail authentication exceeds a limit that is specific to the AEAD in use, the endpoint MUST immediately close the connection. Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before reaching this limit. Applying a limit reduces the probability that an attacker is able to successfully forge a packet; see {{AEBounds}} and {{ROBUST}}._

_For AEAD_AES_128_GCM, AEAD_AES_256_GCM, and AEAD_CHACHA20_POLY1305, the limit on the number of packets that fail authentication is 2^36..._

after any record fails an authentication check. In comparison, QUIC ignores any
packet that cannot be authenticated, allowing multiple forgery attempts.

Endpoints MUST count the number of received packets that fail authentication for
each set of keys.  If the number of packets that fail authentication with the
same key exceeds a limit that is specific to the AEAD in use, the endpoint MUST
stop using those keys.  Endpoints MUST initiate a key update before reaching

> this limit.  If a key update is not possible, the endpoints MUST immediately

Author: ```suggestion
this limit.  If a key update is not possible, the endpoint MUST immediately
```

a1359d8e
~~~

> # Analysis of Limits on AEAD_AES_128_CCM Usage {#ccm-bounds}

Reviewer 6: Would it make sense to move this to an appendix? Ideally I would prefer for this to not be in the draft at all, and instead have a reference to a peer-reviewed paper, but I suspect that doesn't exist today.

  is the bound on the number of packets that can be protected before updating
  keys.

v:

: The number of forged packets that endpoints will accept. This value is the
  bound on the number of forged packets that an endpoint can reject before
  updating keys.

The analysis of AEAD_AES_128_CCM relies on a count of the number of block
operations involved in producing each message. For simplicity, and to match the
analysis of other AEAD functions in {{AEBounds}}, this analysis assumes a
packet length of 2^10 blocks and a packet size limit of 2^14.

For AEAD_AES_128_CCM, the total number of block cipher operations is the sum
of: the length of the associated data in blocks, the length of the ciphertext
in blocks, the length of the plaintext in blocks, plus 1. In this analysis,
this is simplified to a value of twice the length of the packet in blocks (that
is, `2l = 2^11`). This simplification is based on the packet containing all of
the associated data and ciphertext. This results in a negligible 1 to 3 block
overestimation of the number of operations.

## Confidentiality Limits

For confidentiality, Theorem 2 in {{?CCM-ANALYSIS}} establishes that an

> attacker gains an advantage over an ideal pseudorandom permutation (PRP) of no

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
attacker gains a distinguishing advantage over an ideal pseudorandom permutation (PRP) of no
```

Reviewer 4: (to clarify that the harm is distinguishability from an ideal PRP, and not plaintext leakage or something.)

more than:

~~~
(2l * q)^2 / 2^n
~~~

For a target advantage of 2^-60, which matches that used by {{!TLS13}}, this
results in the relation:

~~~
q <= 2^23
~~~

That is, endpoints cannot protect more than 2^23 packets with the same set of
keys without causing an attacker to gain an larger advantage than the target of
2^-60.

## Integrity Limits

For integrity, Theorem 1 in {{?CCM-ANALYSIS}} establishes that an attacker

> gains an advantage over an ideal PRP of no more than:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
gains a distinguishing advantage over an ideal PRP of no more than:
```

Reviewer 4: Yep, sorry, I misinterpreted their definition of Adv^{auth}!

result. This produces the relation:

~~~
v + q <= 2^24.5
~~~

> Using the previously-established value of 2^24 for `q` and rounding, this leads

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Using the previously-established value of 2^23 for `q` and rounding, this leads
```

Reflecting the updated confidentiality bound.
